Benzoyl Peroxide (Explained + Products)
Products
Ingredients
Decode INCI
Login
Register
Login
Register
Products
Ingredients
Decode INCI
Follow us on our new Insta page »
Benzoyl Peroxide
What-it-does:
anti-acne
Official CosIng Information
All Functions:
oxidising
CAS #:
94-36-0
                     |
EC #:
202-327-6
Chemical/IUPAC Name:
Dibenzoyl Peroxide
Cosmetic Restrictions:
III/94
Details
The
gold standard
topical ingredient in
treating acne
. There is no miracle cure for acne (we do really wish for one, *sigh*), but Benzoyl Peroxide (BP) is probably the closest thing we have. But, as usual, big effects come with big side effects, so we think BP is best used as a last resort (at least, in the topical treatment field).
The good thing about BP is that it is amazingly
effective against inflammatory-type acne
. Not so much against blackheads or whiteheads, but against acne that is caused by the evil bacteria called
Propionibacterium acnes
(and that is most types of acne).  Apart from being
antibacterial
, it is also
anti-inflammatory
,
keratolytic and wound-healing
, all of which are properties that make it so darn effective against spots.
Another big pro of BP is that there is
no bacterial resistance
to it, meaning if it works once it will continue to work. Antibiotics are also a common way to treat acne, but antibiotic-resistant P. acnes are increasing worldwide. BP will probably help you even if antibiotics have stopped working, and the two are also often combined for a more complex acne therapy. Btw, BP plays nice not only with antibiotics but also with
retinoids
.
The side-effects part? BP works its antibacterial magic by being a
powerful oxidizing agent,
meaning it is a pro-oxidant. As in the opposite of an
antioxidant
. BP literally generates evil ROS (reactive oxygen species) in the skin that kills P. acnes but also harms the surrounding skin cells.
Ongoing BP-use ages your skin,
which is why, we say, use it as a last resort. If you do use BP, please also use a good sunscreen and a good antioxidant serum to apologise
to your skin (btw, these things are useful in any case). Use the BP treatment at night and the antioxidant serum in the morning so that they do not cancel each other out.
Another side effect of BP is that it can be very
skin drying
. BP is an example where
more is not better
. In fact, it is equally effective at concentrations of 2.5, 5.0 and 10%, but the higher the concentration the more irritating and drying side effects occur. So
using BP at 2.5% percent is the ideal amount
. Another side effect which is good to know is that BP can
bleach bedsheets and clothes.
Be careful with your expensive satin bedsheets.
Overall
, Benzoyl Peroxide is a uniquely effective topical acne treatment, but it comes at a price. Use it as a last resort and for good measure (and with plenty of moisturizers, sunscreen, and antioxidant serum).
[more]
[more]
[less]
Something incorrect or missing?
Let us know!
Show me some proof
Sagransky, Matt, Brad A. Yentzer, and Steven R. Feldman. "Benzoyl peroxide: a review of its current use in the treatment of acne vulgaris." Expert opinion on pharmacotherapy 10.15 (2009): 2555-2562.
[less]
